Good day I'm Norman Wildberger. Today we're going
to talk about division, a very important subject
for primary school education, and we'll have some
interesting things to say about the importance,
especially of long division, for students. Let's
start with the definition that M divided by N is
K means that M is K groups of N or K times N. So,
for example, if we want to know what 24 divided by
4 is, we need to know how many groups of 4 there
are in 24. Well, we can peel off groups of four
one at a time, and now we see that there are one,
two, three, four, five, six groups of four within
24, so 24 divided by 4 is 6. This shows that
division is repeated subtraction. We subtract 4,
then we subtract another 4, and we subtract
another 4 until we've exhausted the original
number. That's also explained by another
notation for division. Instead of M over N,
sometimes we write M divided by N. This is another
sign for division that resembles subtraction.
Here are four main laws of division:
K over M plus N over M equals K plus N over M
K over M times N over L is K
times N divided by M times L
K divided by M all over N is
K divided by the product MN
K divided by M divided by
N is K times N divided by M
So we're going to look at the proof. We're going
to prove 1 and 4 for you and leave 2 and 3 as
exercises for you. All right, let's start with
the first law. K divided by M plus N divided by
M equals K plus N divided by M. Here, the
denominators are the same. Just trying to
prove something like this, we'll introduce some
notation to make our life easier. We'll decide
that K divided by M will be called A, N divided by
M will be called B, and K plus N divided by M will
be C. So that's A, that's B, that's C, and we want
to prove that A plus B equals C. What do these
various things mean? This one means that K equals
A times M. This one means that N equals B times M,
and this one means that K plus N equals C times
M. So we're just unraveling it, connecting it to
the definition via multiplication. Now, let's look
at K plus N. Here, K plus N is AM plus BM. Here,
the distributive law shows this can be written
as A plus B times M. On the other hand,
K plus N from here is C times M. So we had
this multiple of M equals this multiple of M,
so A plus B times M equals C times M. So
that means that A plus B has to equal C.
For the fourth law, K divided by M divided by
N, which is a little bit strange, is equal to K
times N divided by M. We do something similar. We
introduce some notation. We'll let M divided by N,
which is the denominator here, be A. We
let this entire expression be, say, B,
and this expression be C. So what we want
to prove is that B equals C. Now we unravel
what these three things mean. This means that M
equals A times N. This means, well, first of all,
note that M divided by N is really A, so
this is really K divided by K equals B,
and we unravel it to say K equals B times A, and
this tells us that K times N equals C times M. Now
we look at K times N from here. So here's K, and
we're going to multiply it by N, B times N. Then
we use the associative law to rewrite that as B
times AN. Then we replace the AN with an M to get
BM. On the other hand, KN from here is C times M.
So BM equals C times M, and so B and C are equal.
Now let's say a few words about long
division, a very important skill that
all students should learn. I realize that
in many curriculums around the world today,
long division is no longer taught. That is a very
serious mistake. You are essentially undermining
students' ability to learn mathematics if you
don't teach them how to explicitly divide one
number by another. Here is a simplified way of
doing long division, which is a little bit less
efficient than the traditional one but is ideally
suited for students who are not so arithmetically
gifted. Let's illustrate it by dividing 203 by 7.
First of all, what does it mean? We think of 203
as a string of ones, 203 ones in a row. We need
to know how many sevens fit into that string,
so we want to peel off one seven after another
and count how many sevens we can peel off until
we get the whole thing. So what we're going
to do is we're going to subtract multiples
of 7 from it and remember how many multiples we
subtracted. First, we look at 203 and ask, well,
how many sevens could safely fit inside there?
We want an underestimate. Well, perhaps twenty
sevens fit inside. Twenty times seven is 140, so
we write 140 there. When we subtract 140 from 203,
we get 63. So after we've peeled off twenty
sevens, there are 63 ones left. How many sevens
are there in 63? Well, we remember from our
multiplication tables that 7 times 9 is 63,
so we peel off nine more sevens, subtract
that to get a remainder of zero. Altogether,
what we've done is we've subtracted 29
sevens, and so 203 divided by 7 is 29.
Let's do a slightly more complicated example:
2166 divided by 38. We want to know how many 38
fit inside here. We make a guess, perhaps forty,
because four times three is twelve and there'll
be a couple of zeros, and the eight will make
it a little bit bigger. If we actually do the
multiplication, four times 38 is 152, with an
extra zero making 1520. So you may have to do
that on the side, that multiplication. So 40
times 38 is 1520. We subtract that from 2166
to get 646. Now we ask how many 38s can fit
into 646? Well, let's guess ten. Ten times 38
is 380. When we subtract that, we get 266. How
many 38 fit into 266? Well, we might guess six.
Six times 38 is 228. If you have to do that
multiplication on the side, when we subtract,
we get 38. How many 38? Well, there's one more 38
that we'll fit in there, and then we'll have zero.
Now, as it turns out, we've done this rather
inefficiently. We've subtracted 40 and then we
subtracted 10. We could have been more efficient
by subtracting 50 all at once. Here we subtracted
6 and then we subtracted 1. We could have been
more efficient and subtracted just 7 multiples,
but it doesn't matter. There's no embarrassment
in taking a few more steps. The main idea is
that students should know what they're doing:
subtracting a certain multiple of 38 from the
number and keeping track of how much is left
over, and you keep subtracting 38 until you've
got nothing left, then you count up how many
38 you subtracted altogether, in this case 57.
Let's do another one more example where things
don't quite work out so well. Let's try to divide
245 by 17. An initial first guess might be ten.
Ten times 17 is 170. We subtract to get 75. We
might guess three 17s fit in there. Three 17s
is 51. We subtract, we get 24 left over. Oh,
we see we could have actually subtracted one more.
Let's subtract one more now. So there's another 17
and we get seven. But now we're in a situation
where we can't subtract any more 17s from seven;
seven's too small. So we get a remainder. The
division doesn't quite work out. This divided by
this is not a natural number, but nevertheless,
we've subtracted fourteen of these 17s,
so we have seven left over. This remainder means
that although this isn't a natural number answer,
it is an important stepping stone to our next
topic: fractions, the most challenging subject
for primary school students in mathematics. I
hope you'll join me for that. I don't bother.